The 29th, I believe it is.
So it is.
Of January, testing 1, 2, 3.
Yes, it is January 29th.
January 29th, we're in the Evans Library, and I have the honor today of chatting with Dr. Melvin Schroeder, S-C-H-R-O-E-D-E-R.
But nobody calls me Melvin except my mother.
Known to everyone as Mel.
To begin with, sir, to introduce yourself to anyone may listen to this tape or read the transcription.
Describe your background.
Where'd you grow up?
Where'd you go to high school?
Family?
What did dad do?
What profession and so forth?
Where did you go to school?
High school, college, and so forth.
Tell the story of your days before you came to A&M.
Well, I was born in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada, in a hospital that is now torn down but used to be called St.
Joseph's, to name a Catholic hospital similar to the Catholic hospital here.
The last time I was up there was when I was roughly
60 years old, so I was at Saskatoon in 77, and visited the new hospital.
They thought it was a little unique that somebody that was 60 years old would come back to visit the hospital they were born in.
But my grandparents lived in Saskatoon, and
But my mother was brought out to, because they moved from eastern Canada, and my mother was the only girl in the family of boys.
And the boys were brought out to homestead land, because Canada was starting to copy the U.S.
in the way they were homesteading land back there in the early 1900s.
And of course, my mother eventually married my father, who was Milton Schroeder, and was the black sheep of the family.
I discovered that later.
And so I went to Door Lake School.
The town of Door Lake used to have a population of about 20 back then.
Now the population is about two.
And it no longer has a post office, but it still has a green elevator.
How do you spell door?
D-E-W-A-R.
Two words, one.
One.
Dewar Lake.
Well, no, the lake.
Oh, two words.
Dewar and lake.
Well, yeah, two words, yeah, Dewar Lake.
But the thing is that they farmed on sandy soil there, so you had to have the rains just right to do it because they came from eastern Ontario where the soils were sandy.
This is really a glacial outwash situation, so there's a lot of clays.
Nowadays, the farmers farm on the clay.
And in the early days, when you homesteaded, you could take the mineral rights, too, if you pay taxes on them.
Otherwise, they stayed with the province.
One of my uncles, his descendant out there, has a gas field.
And my uncle apparently did pay the taxes early and did take the mineral rights, so he has done all right.
I left there in 1925 because the year I was born was
towards the end of World War I. And they received $5, roughly $5 America, because American money and Canadian money were worth about the same then.
And they had the reins just right, so they got about 100 bushels to the acre, which is very good.
This is wheat?
Wheat, yeah.
But then they had the long drought after that.
So by 25, the drought had pretty well finished them off.
So they left Canada for Spokane.
And so I entered Bemis grade school and then eventually to Rogers High School.
and then eventually I went to Washington State University.
My father deserted us, so my mother had to raise three kids by herself.
And I understand the Depression because I was on relief in WPA, because there was something like 30 percent unemployed.
When I got out of high school, all I was interested in doing was getting a job.
And there weren't any jobs around.
If you had something that showed up, you'd have a hundred people out there waiting to be interviewed for the job.
So eventually I went with my father back to Detroit and worked in a cushion factory for Jenkson Muir Division of Ford Motor Company.
And then I made the discovery that these automobiles are made by everybody.
That Ford Motor Company was making cushions for everybody.
And so that lasted about six months.
I went through one of the
quickest sit-down strikes I've ever seen.
One day I was making 30 cents an hour, the next day about 75.
The only thing is, it didn't help much because everything else went up.
So, when I came back, my mother had decided that she wanted her kids to get a college education, so she had the opportunity
to run a boarding and rooming house for the Kiwanis in Pullman, Washington.
So we moved down there to do that.
And I managed to somehow earn enough money to pay the tuition, which was then $25.
Not like the— What year was that?
That— That you were a freshman.
That was in 37, 1937.
And I'd had a chem prof in high school that I thought very highly of.
And of course, we were benched for a long time from lab work because I and another fellow by the name of Don Clark,
did some mixing up of chemicals and had an explosion that rocked the high school.
So, obviously, the principal made a trip up there.
And so, well, we were the two sharpest people in class, anyway.
Don has since retired as a vet.
He went through veterinary medicine down there.
But at the end of my freshman year, I got a C in the second semester chem major course.
So that says to me, I'm not going to be a chem major.
So I'd done some fiddling around and panning for gold and just seeing colors and this.
So I thought, well, I'll go into mining engineering.
And so the only good thing that came out of that was that I had one year of engineering physics and one year of calculus and preparation before I decided I liked geology better.
And one of the reasons it made me is
I worked in the mines in northern Idaho, and I progressed in my summers, and I took one semester off that
so that I worked all the way up from mucker, which is the lowest person on the totem pole.
A muck snake, you know, is a shovel.
And so the general hierarchy there was a mucker and then a timberman's helper and then a miner, the one that did the drilling and put the explosives in and set it up for blasting, and then a timberman.
And so I worked up through all four of those.
And in working there, I found out that I was, as a mucker, making more money than the mining engineer.
This is one of the problems of the mineral industry.
The professionals, they didn't really adequately reimburse.
Probably the only company that did radically reimburse was
and to contact Butte.
Now, one of the things I did was I joined the union when I was there.
Because you sure didn't get harassed if you belonged to the union.
And later on in my senior year, just after Pearl Harbor, that Christmas vacation I went up and worked in the House Sound Mine.
Well, it's up at the head of Lakes of Land, up in almost the crest of the Cascades.
And that one, of course, I had my union demit with me, so I showed him and said, I'm not going to join your union because I'm going to leave here before then since I'm just here over Christmas vacation.
Now, the other college kids who were up there working over that really got harassed, because that was a closed shop.
And when you're up there, you're really the only ones single miners up there, because there were no housing.
I did have a friend up there, a fraternity brother, that was a mining engineer there.
Now, that did pay the mining engineers.
pretty well, and provided them housing so they could have families.
And you had to be transported about 20 miles from the mine down to the lake, because you had to go up to the head of the lake.
But there was a school down there at wherever they boat docked coming up from Lakeland.
Let's digress a second.
You mentioned Pearl Harbor.
Describe where, how, when,
you heard of Pearl Harbor and what you and your friends, what you all thought that might mean.
Well, Pearl Harbor, I was in a rooming house, which I had cooking privilege, because I generally ate out in a small restaurant somewhere.
I hardly ever made any meals myself there.
And I had the radio on and heard it over the radio.
Well, I would say that the general impression was everybody right away wanted to enlist.
A week later, after they'd thought it over, they were trying to figure out how to finish college without being caught up by the service.
However, I was 4F because of my eyesight.
My eyesight was 2,200, and they weren't drafting people below 2,100 at that time.
However, towards the end of the war, I think they changed that.
So my senior year, I had a job with Anaconda coming up.
I could have got a draft deferment with this.
It was in their geology department, but it was being a sampler because they started their geologists out.
doing sampling first.
But I finally—well, I even did some hitchhiking from Pullman up to Spokane to catch up with this guy in order to get enlisted into the Army Air Corps Cadet Program.
Now, I was—the only thing opened
See, all geologists want to be photo interpreters.
And most of them end up that way in the service.
But that was closed.
The only thing open was communications.
And so I enlisted in communications.
And when I took the physical exam, I had to go to Seattle to do that.
When the fellow checked my eyesight and saw what it is, he said, well, you'll eventually be drafted with that eyesight.
It'd be better if you served as an officer, so you've got to read the chart at 2100.
So it's that third line now.
Take off your glasses.
Lead that third line to me.
Well, obviously, you memorized it.
And incidentally, I made the comment, the induction to the Texas Science Hall of Fame on that.
I've often wondered, I said to the audience out there about that when I explained how I arrived at doing the science teacher program, that I often wondered whether I had cheated.
The reaction was the same as yours.
It brought down the house.
But I guess when you're in that type of situation, it really didn't make much difference.
So, with that physics and calculus, when I finished communication school, the Army sent me to the Army Electronics Training Command as a student.
Now, we had, I think we had about four people from the Air Corps in that group.
The group was about, I'd say about 50 Navy and about 50 Army, so there were about 100 people in each class.
And I was at Harvard four and a half months.
And incidentally, the competition was all physics majors and electrical engineers.
And here are poor geologists in the midst of all of those.
I ended up in the middle of the class, so I thought that was pretty good.
The only resentment I had in that place is in the Army, if you were in school, you couldn't get any promotions.
The Navy could.
So those Navy people got at least one promotion while they were there.
Because we were three months at Harvard, supposedly, and three months at MIT.
And I got graduate credit for both of those, 10 credits each.
I used the 10 from MIT on my PhD program.
Very good.
But another thing I had a resentment for, West Pointer was in there.
He came in as a captain.
He was on detached duty, so he could receive promotions.
He left as a lieutenant colonel.
Oh, pretty good.
Yeah.
Got a promotion every three months.
So, and then got sent down to Jupiter, Florida to be in charge of the radar, coastal radar station of the Signal Corps down there.
So, now, then I got over
and eventually ended up with the Eighth Air Force.
It's one of those places.
I was at three different places over there.
And were you based in Britain?
Yeah, East Anglia, part of Great Britain.
And first base was Alconbury.
And I took, went back there in about 90.
They were having a 50-year reunion of 92, probably.
And so British Airways was running some tours, so I took one.
It stopped at Alconbury, and the PR people didn't know anything about what happened there during the war.
Not a thing.
You'd think they would have looked it up or something.
I found out over there that most of the places
like we visited Bassingborn, remember the picture of the Memphis Belle?
That fellow, the reason he completed those missions is that on the bomb run he was taking evasive action.
When I
got over there, and Doolittle was in command of the 8th Air Force.
He says, anybody that takes the plane away from the bombardier and tries to divert it from a straight bomb on run will be court-martialed.
So, there was a different thing.
Now, there were three officers, types of officers over there that were not permitted ever to fly over Germany.
One was the Nordenbombsite people, and the other was the H2X radar people, because they knew too much.
Our radar was so much better than the Germans.
And so when I came back, I used the GI Bill, and of course I had
couple things on the way.
One, I was offered a permanent regular commission over there when we were in the Air Force of Occupation.
And I decided I would have to take orders from these pilots, which most of them could just pilot a plane, and that was it.
And I don't know how come I got to be a First Lieutenant over there, because I even, when I was, I was a First Lieutenant by then, shook a donut under the Colonel's nose and said, this isn't the way to do it.
This is the way you should do it.
But if you want it done that other way, we'll do it that other way.
So I wasn't, the only people I were popular with was my enlisted men.
Because I don't like to use this word, but I once told a major to go to hell, over the telephone, of course, because he was trying to order me to have my men go out when we had a freezing rain and fix a radar set on a plane.
And I said, no way, you got enough Pathfinder planes for tomorrow's mission.
Well, he says, I want a perfect maintenance record.
I said, that's tough.
If you want the colonel's telephone number, I'll give it to you, because I take orders only from him."
Well, now, the miniature enlisted men find out something like this.
Oh, yes.
You don't have to worry about anything.
And I never had to worry about anything.
I had occasionally walked through the radar shack, but
That war, if they dropped all the paperwork on the Germans, the war would have been over.
Because that was what my job was, was filling out what was going on in terms of maintenance and all of this.
Where were you at D-Day?
D-Day?
I was at Langley Field.
I was in transit to going overseas.
I landed overseas on July 4th, 1944.
And then as soon as V.E.
Day, how long before you came back here?
in December before I got—because I got—the Army Air Corps had feelings that it didn't want it to be the Air Force back in those days, and the Army was redeploying people home.
They had a good system worked up.
And then the, I got, the batch that left before me was still handled by the Army, got home fairly rapidly.
I think I left the base in November and didn't, first part of November, and it wasn't until the middle of December that we left.
So you go back to college when?
I went back
the spring semester of... 46?
Yeah, that's right.
And where?
Washington State University.
I graduated from Washington State with a bachelor's.
I have my master's from there and my PhD.
The only good thing I can say about it is the faculty was different.
And you finished your PhD when?
I didn't get the degree until 53.
53, okay.
Yeah, because I had finished the dissertation.
Oh.
And so I did it in absentia.
Okay.
And where was your first postgraduate job?
After you left Washington State, where'd you first?
I went to work for the U.S.
Geological Survey and went to work for the Groundwater Branch in Miami, Florida.
In those days, there weren't any courses in groundwater, most universities.
This is what they hired me at A&M for, is because I had experience in groundwater, so that I could introduce some groundwater courses here.
When did A&M and how did they first make contact with you?
I think I saw an ad in
Geotimes or something.
About when was this?
Oh, this was in the spring of 54, because I made one trip to Oklahoma, and it happened that the wind was blowing, and the Permian red beds were blowing all of that red dust around, and I knew my wife
who liked to hang out closed and not use a dryer, wouldn't like red sheets.
How did A&M contact you?
They contacted me by
Telephone.
Shirley Lynch was the department head then.
I don't know if you remember.
What's the first name?
Shirley.
Shirley?
Yeah.
The man was Shirley.
Okay.
Shirley Lynch.
L-Y-N-C-H.
And how did they go about recruiting you?
Just talked to me on the telephone.
Okay.
Did you come to visit for an interview?
No.
They didn't have interview money here then in those days.
Did they call any of your references?
Yeah, they called my supervisor.
Okay.
And the only question I'm going to ask about money, what was your first salary at A&M?
$5,400 for nine months.
How did that seem at that time to you?
Well, it was a lot more than one of the Colorado schools up at Fort Collins.
They were just going to give me scenery.
And what did you know, describe the geology program at A&M when you arrived.
What was it like?
Well, it was a,
Let's put it this way.
We had a program that was putting out a lot of master's degrees, and we started putting out PhDs later than that.
The one thing that I do remember is Halibutty had scholarships for master's students if they were undergraduate graduates of A&M.
And when I came here, it was cadet corps.
And no women were admitted during the school year.
However, it's been only ten years since I'd been an officer, so when an explosion occurred in the building, because we had petroleum engineering in the same building, an explosion occurred that rocked the building, and I said,
Stand up, march out, the way they went, and leave your books.
Now, you wouldn't dare leave a book nowadays.
Right.
You could in those days.
Describe the department, who was in it, and who were the most reputable members of the department when you came?
Well, Shirley Lynch was here and Travis Parker.
What were their specialties?
Travis Parker was structural.
Shirley Lynch was just a general geologist.
And Shirley had come down here when, gosh,
I forget the name of the fellow, but he was the chancellor way early when I was here.
He was a civil engineer.
Gilchrist?
Gilchrist.
Gib Gilchrist.
Yeah, Gib Gilchrist.
And he talked to Gib, and he said, I can make this into a good department.
It was over in
Well, science and liberal arts were sort of messed up together.
Arts and sciences.
Yeah.
And he said, I would want to move it into the College of Engineering, and I'd want to add a degree in geological engineering.
And, of course, the degree was added.
It was a combination between petroleum engineering and geological engineering.
And we had maybe about half the students in it those days because it made a good situation for somebody going to work.
And what reputation did A&M have in geology nationally?
Was it well known at all?
No, not then.
Well, right now it isn't well known.
University of Texas will generally be in the top 10 departments in the country, and we aren't.
Was the emphasis primarily petroleum-related then?
Yes, primarily oil.
Now it's more generally related.
I think probably our best specialty now is engineering geology, the geology-related too.
construction or environmental geology.
You mentioned Parker.